Salivary gland cancer is a cancer that forms in tissues of a salivary gland. The salivary glands are classified as major and minor. The major salivary glands consist of the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. The minor glands include small mucus-secreting glands located throughout the palate, nasal and oral cavity. Salivary gland cancer is rare, with 6% of head and neck tumors forming in the salivary glands, the majority in the parotid.


== Classification ==
Due to diverse nature of salivary gland neoplasms, many different terms and classification systems have been used. Perhaps the most widely used currently is that system proposed by the World Health Organization in 2004, which classifies salivary neoplasms as primary or secondary, benign or malignant, and also by tissue of origin. This system defines five broad categories of salivary gland neoplasms:
Malignant epithelial tumors
Acinic cell carcinoma
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma
Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
Clear cell carcinoma, not otherwise specified
Basal cell adenocarcinoma
Sebaceous carcinoma
Sebaceous lymphadenocarcinoma
Cystadenocarcinoma
Low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma
Mucinous adenocarcinoma
Oncocytic carcinoma
Salivary duct carcinoma
Salivary duct carcinoma, not otherwise specified
Adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified
Myoepithelial carcinoma
Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma
Carcinosarcoma
Metastasizing pleomorphic adenoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Large cell carcinoma
Lymphoepithelial carcinoma
Sialoblastoma

Benign epithelial tumors
Pleomorphic adenoma
Myoepithelioma
Basal cell adenoma
Warthin's tumor
Oncocytoma
Canalicular adenoma
Lymphadenoma
Sebaceous lymphadenoma
Nonsebaceous lymphadenoma

Ductal papilloma
Inverted ductal papilloma
Intraductal papilloma
Sialadenoma papilliferum

Cystadenoma

Soft tissue tumors
Hemangioma

Hematolymphoid tumors
Hodgkin lymphoma
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma

Secondary tumors (i.e. a tumor which has metastasized to the salivary gland from a distant location)
Others, not included in the WHO classification above, include:
Intraosseous (central) salivary gland tumors
Hybrid tumors (i.e. a tumor displaying combined forms of histologic tumor types)
Hybrid carcinoma
Others

Others
Keratocystoma
Sialolipoma


== Signs and symptoms ==

Signs include fluid draining from the ear, pain, numbness, weakness, trouble swallowing, and a lump. The most common symptom of major salivary gland cancer is a painless lump in the affected gland, sometimes accompanied by paralysis of the facial nerve.


== Diagnosis ==
In most cases, local excision with a margin of normal tissue is the appropriate form of biopsy for a major salivary gland tumor. In the parotid region, this requires identification of the facial nerve. For submandibular tumors, the entire submandibular triangle is cleared. In contrast, minor salivary gland tumors have a higher likelihood of being malignant, and an incisional biopsy is performed initially so that definitive treatment can be planned. In the parotid region, the presence of pain, recent rapid enlargement of a preexisting nodule, skin involvement, or facial nerve paralysis suggests cancer. Enlarged cervical lymph nodes in association with a salivary gland tumor are considered a manifestation of cancer until proved otherwise. Fine-needle aspiration is indicated if accurate diagnosis will allow for better treatment planning.


== Treatment ==
Treatment may include the following:
Surgery with or without radiation
Radiotherapy
Fast neutron therapy has been used successfully to treat salivary gland tumors, and has shown to be significantly more effective than photons in studies treating unresectable salivary gland tumors.
Chemotherapy


== See also ==
Head and neck cancer
Salivary gland pathology


== References ==


== External links ==
Salivary gland cancer entry in the public domain NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms
Clinically reviewed salivary gland cancer for patients from Cancer Research UK.
 This article incorporates public domain material from the U.S. National Cancer Institute document "Dictionary of Cancer Terms".